Title: 2019
Date: 2019-01-01 17:32
Author: jinhaochan
Category: Uncategorized
Slug: 2019
Status: published

<!-- wp:paragraph -->

This is a post that's not technical, but I feel that it's important for me to put this down here.

<!-- /wp:paragraph -->

<!-- wp:paragraph -->

2019 will be a year of learning and improvement. Although learning and improving is something I've always aimed to do, whats different this time is how i'm framing my objective.

<!-- /wp:paragraph -->

<!-- wp:paragraph -->

I feel that in the past, my motivations for improving myself has been relative to someone else, and often times, that someone else is an unrealistic comparison. For example, I would constantly compare my performance against someone who has been in the field for many years. Obviously, this would bring about disastrous and demoralizing results. And many a times, I have felt this way.

<!-- /wp:paragraph -->

<!-- wp:paragraph -->

This year, I will frame it in a different way. Although I will be comparing my results absolute results with the professionals, I would place more emphasis on my personal results i.e. what I have learnt, how have I improved personally. And this blog will serve as a great medium for me to note down my lessons.

<!-- /wp:paragraph -->

<!-- wp:paragraph -->

This seems like an obvious thing to do really, but for a competitive personality like myself, I need to constantly remind myself that it's not the end that matters, but the learning journey. I read a quote somewhere that says "You never lose, you only win or learn.", and that's the attitude I will be taking.

<!-- /wp:paragraph -->

<!-- wp:paragraph -->

Don't be too hard on yourself!

<!-- /wp:paragraph -->
