Title: Lets Be Real
Date: 2020-05-31 14:47
Author: Chan Jin Hao
Category: Ramblings
Slug: lets-be-real
Status: published

So its the end of May... and I clearly did not follow through on the one Clojure lesson a week. But hey! I did quite a lot, and grasp plenty of it's fundamental, and I think that's good enough to learn something.

I did feel my motivation wane halfway through, and it did prompt me again to question what drives me to do something. The answer is always Impact. Or put simply, so what?

If I didn't find any useful meaning to the work I was doing, or see how it could help me in my life, I would not be motivated to do it. Exceptions to this claim are things that I enjoy doing, but has no tangible impact (I'm seeing you, Apex Legends). So the fact that I lost interest halfway shows that it has neither the impact, nor the enjoyment factor to it.

And I like to recount the lesson I read from some book, that the myth of Grit, and pushing through everything is false. You have limited time and energy, so if you dont enjoy doing something, and there is no consequence is doing it at all, it's okay to drop it. Keep doing this long enough, and you'll eventually find out what you enjoy doing, and actually has impact (however you define it).

Taking a big step back and looking at my career, do I enjoy it? And does it have impact?

Being in cyber security, they always tout that there is impact. Protecting assets, defending the network yada yada yada. But when you actually work in it, you'll start to realize that a lot of the work seems to be driven by FUD: Fear, Uncertainity, Doubt. They paint ridiculous and obscure use cases, and build tools and software to defend against such niche scenarios. Unless you're a huge billion dollar company, or have really important assets that pertain to things like National Defence, Intelligence, or Corporate Patents, no sophisticated threat actor is going to target you.

Sure, there are lots of attacks that are happening daily. Web based attacks like SQL Injection attempts and XSS, Ransomware, Phishing websites and scams, malware and adwares. But I would consider these extremely low level attacks, and it can be performed by a script kiddie. These aren't sophisticated attacks that warrent complex solutions, save for a few like Ransomware, which requires the rollback solution to do pretty complicated stuff. These TTPs, or tactics, techniques and procedures, are pretty simple, and you don't exactly need a million dollar solution for it. These complex and over-engineered solutions are made in place to cover an extremely complex problem: humans. Alot of the problems can be solved simply by educating your users, and putting in proper controls. But that's not sexy, and selling processes dosen't sell for millions.

I'm not trying to say security is not important, but if all you need is a metal gate to secure your house, would you sell your customers a lead-laced door to protect them from radiation from a nuclear fallout? Sure, it might happen, but what are the chances? As i've been to all these security conferences where vendors showcase their solutions, more than half of them smell like snakeoil, and honestly, nothing i've never seen before, and i've not seen alot. And thats probably because the problem space is actually pretty small, yet we have so many vendors and companies and startups building the same thing over and over again. I think cyber security does have it's place in this industry, but different sectors have different scales of requirments, that require different scales of solutions. Some you can defend yourself, some you require the police, some you require the military, and some you require concentrated global effort. Analyzing what your company needs is important before pulling the trigger.

Put it simply, there's only 2 spaces: Network, and Local, both of which are huge spaces, with lots of domains within them to cover. And granted, I think it's impossible for a single company to come up with a turnkey solution to everything. NIDS, HIDS, Netflow, DNS, Application Logs, Event Logs etc. And those are just artifacts, we have to also cover behavioral stuff like DDoS, visting a phishing site, data exfiltration.

But back to my point, does everyone really need that? Some companies do, those that hold extremely precious data. Most companies don't, and when I say most, I mean A LOT of them don't. A Shipping Forwarder company? What extremely important digital assets do you have? Invoices? P&L statements? Will leaking those out cause your company to collapse? Just get a Firewall and tell your staff not to visit shady websites during working hours or on company assets.

The most obvious customers here are Government Agencies, who somehow have a magical unlimited budget, and a multitude of problems to solve. They also hold the most important digital assets, those pertaining to National and State level information. But these guys don't buy external products often, and would rather invest in in-house solutions for the sake of security. Othertimes, they would embark on partnerships and research projects with "Trusted Partners". So apparently, the playing field here is also pretty small. Unless you're a throughly trusted partnet (aka a local company with known contacts, and locals working for them), you won't be let in. They won't trust a foreign consultant to come in, analyze their systems, and install and integrate a software that has been built by foreigners, essentially tethering their entire system on another entity. Nothing xenophobic about that, it's just business.

The biggest money makers in this whole sector seems to be affliate content hosters. Virus Total, FireEye, and other companies that consolidate Threat Intelligence, and sell them to other cyber security vendors to build their products. Their customers are primarily vendors who use the information to enrich their solution, which is then sold to actual users. Most of the time, they don't produce the content themselves, but get them from other users who upload the data. Virus Total for example, is entire driven by user uploads, as they build their repository of samples, before selling "Queries" to cyber companies to perform enrichment or investigation.

So we have companies (first hand) who provide services for companies (second hand) to build products for the consumers (terminal). Second hand companies come and go, but first hand companies always stay. Do first hand companies necessarily have more impact than second hand companies? Yes and no. First hand companies provide you with the tools, and second hand companies use these tools to do the actual work. Sometimes the work is important, other times you're sold a fork to drink soup. I personally dont see meaning in working for a first hand company though, because you don't actually see the impact. But that's just my personal preference.


So where really is the impact here? Upselling over-developed solutions to small-medium firms who don't really need a lead-laced door? Second hand companies who build solutions for the small handful of sectors who actually need it: Finance, Health, Government, thats where the real impact is for me. And maybe that's what I would like to work on. Areas that actually have meaning, and not a false narrative and sales generated by FUD. I've been fortunate enough to have only one such experience in my career, to work on something that I feel was absolutely superfluous, and had no reason for being there, aside from being a symbol of cooperation between nations.

And I guess as I go on with my career and life in general, I should always ask: What cause am I working for? Can I see the impact? Does it resonate with me? I believe in the importance of securing truly important assets, and I recognize that the dangers and threats around is real. But they are not everywhere, and are mostly located at prominent targets: Political events like elections (Government), Finances of important entities (Finance), the wellbeing of important figures and the nation (Healthcare).

"Those who have a 'why' to live, can bear with almost any 'how'."
― Viktor E. Frankl, Man's Search for Meaning
